\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename scicomp.info
@settitle The Scientific Computing Toolkit
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
Copyright 1994 Sandia Corporation
@end ifinfo
     
@titlepage
@title The Scientific Computing Toolkit
@author Curtis Janssen, Edward Seidl, and Michael Colvin

@c  The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 Sandia Corporation
@end titlepage

@c set up a classname input
@defindex cl

@c set up a macro index
@defindex mc

@node Top,  , (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This document describes the Scientific Computing Toolkit.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* The Ref Library::             A library for maintaining reference counts to objects.
* The Class Library::           A library for describing classes.
* The State Library::           A library for saving and restoring the state of objects.
* The KeyVal Library::          A library for making keyword/value associations.

--- Communication Libraries ---

--- Math Libraries ---
* The Matrix Library::          This provides a variety of matrix types.

--- Chemistry Libraries ---

--- Indices ---
* Concept Index::               The concept index.
* Class Index::                 The index to class names.
* Macro Index::                 The index to macros definitions.
@end menu

@include ref.texi
@include class.texi
@include state.texi
@include keyval.texi
@include scmat.texi
@include idxcon.texi
@include idxcls.texi
@include idxmac.texi

@contents
@bye
